lib.extendMkDerivation: init (#234651)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/build-helpers/fixed-point-arguments.chapter.md

] args)
```
:::

wrap around the original definition with `lib.adaptMkDerivation` to make the result build helper also accept fixed-point arguments.

```nix
lib.adaptMkDerivation stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, specialArg ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

# The arguments to pass
{
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
  # Some expressions involving specialArg
  greeting =
    if specialArg "hi" then "hi" else "hello";
} // removeAttrs [
  "specialArg"
] args)
```

We could then refactor the definition to pass everything properly, while keeping some backward compatibility.

```nix
lib.adaptMkDerivation stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, specialArg ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

# The arguments to pass
{
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
  passthru = {
    specialArg =
      if (args?specialArg) then
        # For backward compatibility only.
        # TODO: Convert to throw after XX.XX branch-off.
        lib.warn
          "mkLocalDerivation: Expect specialArg under passthru."
          args.specialArg
      else
        (_: false);

>   } // passthru;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  } // args.passthru or { };
```

Author: Oops! Thank you for noticing the glitch!

  # Some expressions involving specialArg
  greeting =
    if finalAttrs.passthru.specialArg "hi" then "hi" else "hello";
} // removeAttrs [
  "specialArg"
] args)
```

Convert to `lib.extendMkDerivation` after deprecation of `specialArg`.

```nix
lib.extendMkDerivation stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, specialArg ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

# The arguments to pass
{
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
  passthru = {
    specialArg = lib.throwIf (args?specialArg)
      "mkLocalDerivation: Expect specialArg under passthru."
      (_: false);

>   } // passthru;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  } // args.passthru or { };
```

:::{.example #ex-build-helpers-mkLocalDerivation-extendMkDerivation}

# Example definition of `mkLocalDerivation` extended from `stdenv.mkDerivation` with `lib.extendMkDerivation`

We want to define a build helper named `mkLocalDerivation` that builds locally without using substitutes by default.

Instead of taking a plain attribute set,

```nix
{
  preferLocalBuild ? true,
  allowSubstitute ? false,
  ...
}@args:

stdenv.mkDerivation (
  args
  // {
    # Attributes to update
    inherit preferLocalBuild allowSubstitute;
  }
)
```

we could define with `lib.extendMkDerivation` an attribute overlay to make the result build helper also accepts the the attribute set's fixed point passing to the underlying `stdenv.mkDerivation`, named `finalAttrs` here:

```nix
lib.extendMkDerivation { } stdenv.mkDerivation (
  finalAttrs:
  {
    preferLocalBuild ? true,
    allowSubstitute ? false,
    ...
  }@args:

  # No need of `args //` here.
  # The whole set of input arguments is passed in advance.
  {
    # Attributes to update
    inherit preferLocalBuild allowSubstitute;
  }

> )

Reviewer 2: Is this formatted with `nixfmt`? Please do so if not.

```
:::

Should there be a need to modify the result derivation, pass the derivation modifying function to `lib.extendMkDerivation` as `lib.customisation.extendMkDerivation { modify = drv: ...; }`.

## Wrapping existing build helper definition with `lib.adaptMkDerivation` {#sec-build-helper-adaptMkDerivation}

Many existing build helpers only pass part of their arguments down to their base build helper, leading to the use of custom overriders (such as `overridePythonPackage`) and extra complexity when overriding.

As a wrapper around [`overrideAttrs`](#sec-pkg-overrideAttrs), `lib.extendMkDerivation` passes the whole set of arguments directly to the base build helper before extending them, making it incompatible with build helpers that only pass part of their input arguments down the base build helper.

> To workaround this issue, [`lib.customisation.adaptMkDerivation`](#function-library-lib.customisation.adaptMkDerivation) is introduced. Instead of taking an attribute overlay that returns a subset of attributes to update, it takes an argument set adapter that returns the whole set of arguments to pass to the base build helper, allowing the removal of some arguments. The expression change needed to adopt `lib.adaptMkDerivation` is also smaller, enabling a smooth transition toward fixed-point arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To work around this issue, [`lib.customisation.adaptMkDerivation`](#function-library-lib.customisation.adaptMkDerivation) is introduced. Instead of taking an attribute overlay that returns a subset of attributes to update, it takes an argument set adapter that returns the whole set of arguments to pass to the base build helper, allowing the removal of some arguments. The change needed to adopt `lib.adaptMkDerivation` is also smaller, enabling a smooth transition to fixed-point arguments.

:::{.example #ex-build-helpers-mkLocalDerivation-adaptMkDerivation}

# Example definition of `mkLocalDerivation` extended from `stdenv.mkDerivation` with `lib.adaptMkDerivation`

> Should the original definition of build helper `mkLocalDerivation` take an argument `specialArg` that cannot be passed to `sdenv.mkDerivation`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take as our example a build helper `mkLocalDerivation`, which requires an argument `specialArg` that cannot be passed to `stdenv.mkDerivation`.

```nix
{
  preferLocalBuild ? true,
  allowSubstitute ? false,
  specialArg ? (_: false),
  ...
}@args:

stdenv.mkDerivation (
  removeAttrs [
    # Don't pass specialArg into mkDerivation.
    "specialArg"
  ] args
  // {
    # Arguments to pass
    inherit preferLocalBuild allowSubstitute;
    # Some expressions involving specialArg
    greeting = if specialArg "hi" then "hi" else "hello";
  }
)
```

> wrap around the original definition with `lib.adaptMkDerivation` to make the result build helper accept fixed-point arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`lib.adaptMkDerivation` is able to wrap the original definition to make the resulting build helper accept fixed-point arguments.
```

```nix
lib.adaptMkDerivation { } stdenv.mkDerivation (
  finalAttrs:
  {
    preferLocalBuild ? true,
    allowSubstitute ? false,
    specialArg ? (_: false),
    ...
  }@args:

  removeAttrs [
    # Don't pass specialArg into mkDerivation.
    "specialArg"
  ] args
  // {
    # Arguments to pass
    inherit preferLocalBuild allowSubstitute;
    # Some expressions involving specialArg
    greeting = if specialArg "hi" then "hi" else "hello";
  }

> )

Reviewer 2: Please format with `nixfmt` if it isn't already.

# Fixed-point arguments of build helpers {#chap-build-helpers-finalAttrs}

> As mentioned in the beginning of this part, `stdenv.mkDerivation` could alternatively accept a fixed-point function. The input of such function, typically named `finalAttrs`, is expected to be the final state of the attribute set.

Reviewer 2: Based on our naming in the function itself, I like the phrase "derivation constructor" or "derivation construction function" where "build helper" is used. It seems more precise (it is a function which constructs a derivation) and as result more able to be used in many different contexts without confusion.

For instance, `make` is a "build helper", as occasionally is `sed` or `bash`. But that's not what's meant here!

Author: Valentin (@fricklerhandwerk) raised this question during the first round of reviews (https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/234651#discussion_r1210849842). At that time, this function was called a "builder"—sharing the same name with the `builder` attribute of `builtins.derivation` (i.e., the program to proceed with the derivation building) and the local/remote builders. To disambiguate, Valentin and I renamed the full Nixpkgs Manual from "builder" to "build helper" (#262648).

Cc: @fricklerhandwerk

Reviewer 3: @ShamrockLee yes, correct. That seemed like enough disambiguation without confusing people's existing habits too much. @philiptaron your suggestion doesn't sound wrong. I particularly like that it gets us further a way from this whole notion of "building", which is not well-defined IMO (Nix merely runs an executable, it just so happens that we use it for "building" software a lot). But for now I tend towards not changing things even more before they're settled. Also "build helper" is not wrong, because Nixpkgs is pretty much about building software, and not that different from Make in that regard.

Reviewer 2: I'm perfectly happy leaving this as is for this PR. I too like the idea of getting away from the term "building", for very similar reasons.

Reviewer 2: @fricklerhandwerk, since you're active on this thread today, mind either dismissing your review or re-reviewing if you feel the need? I didn't see what specifically you requested changes on a few years ago.

    allowSubstitute
    ;
})
```

:::

A wrapper of `lib.extendMkDerivation` around the original definition brings the magical `finalAttrs` to the build helper:

:::{.example #ex-build-helpers-mkLocalDerivation-extendMkDerivation}

# Example definition of `mkLocalDerivation` extended from `stdenv.mkDerivation` with `lib.extendMkDerivation`

Write in `pkgs/by-name/mk/mkLocalDerivation/package.nix`:

```nix
# Dependencies to be injected with `pkg.callPackage`
{ lib
, stdenv
}:

# Expression that evaulates to the build helper
lib.extendMkDerivation stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, impassablePredicate ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

removeAttrs args [
  "impassablePredicate"
] // {
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
})
```

:::

Should there be a need to modify the result derivation, `lib.customisation.extendMkDerivationModified` additionally takes a derivation modification function as the first argument. This comes in handy when we would like to add some default overridings to the result derivation, or decorate it with [`lib.extendDerivation`](#function-library-lib.customisation.extendDerivation).

> Extending a build helper with `lib.extendMkDerivation` is different from extending the fixed-point arguments with `lib.extend` or [`<pkg>.overrideAttrs`](#sec-pkg-overrideAttrs), as the implementation can choose *not* to pass some input arguments (e.g. `impassablePredicate`) down the base build helper instead of having to pass everything like a conventional overriding/overlay.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Extending a build helper with `lib.extendMkDerivation` is different from extending the fixed-point arguments with `lib.extend` or [`<pkg>.overrideAttrs`](#sec-pkg-overrideAttrs), as the implementation can choose *not* to pass some input arguments (e.g. `impassablePredicate`) down the base build helper instead of having to pass everything like a conventional override.
```

Not sure if overlay would even be the right thing to mention here. In any case, it would help to link to the relevant section, even if one can expect readers to know that one already - for reference, to look up how these concepts relate.

# Fixed-point arguments of build helpers {#chap-build-helpers-finalAttrs}

As mentioned in the beginning of this part, `stdenv.mkDerivation` could alternatively accept a fixed-point function. The input of such function, typically named `finalAttrs`, is expected to be the final state of the attribute set.

> A build helper like this is said to accept **fixed-point arguments**.

Author: > FWIW, the documentation currently calls those functions “explicitly recursive attribute sets” rather than “fixed-point functions/arguments.” I believe it would be better to be consistent, whichever term is prefered.

IIRC, we intentionally avoid the wording "recursive attribute set", as it refers to the anti-pattern we try to replace (`rec { ... }`).

The new name "fixed-point arguments" is decided here: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/262648#discussion_r1368098933

> Of course, the prefered wording should be uniformized across the documentation (or at least across the new text in this PR)

I thought I had replaced them all in #262648. Is there something I forgot to change?

As [`stdenv.mkDerivation`'s support of fixed-point arguments](#mkderivation-recursive-attributes) was first included in the Nixpkgs release 22.05, `mkDerivation`-style build helpers don't always come with such support yet.

## Defining a build helper with `lib.extendMkDerivation` {#sec-build-helper-extendMkDerivation}

> The Nixpkgs library function [`lib.customisation.extendMkDerivation`](#function-library-lib.customisation.extendMkDerivation) can be used to define a build helper supporting fixed-point arguments from an existing one with such support. It can also bring fixed-point argument support to existing builders as a wrapper around the original definition.

Author: `lib.extendMkDerivation` doesn't take a conventional build helper and modify it. We modify the Nix expression that defines the build helper to make it support fixed-point arguments.

However, we don't need to implement from scratch the logic to consume `finalAttrs: { ... }` as `stdenv.mkDerivation` does, nor do we need to pass all the arguments to the base build helper and ship the build-helper-specific implementation (as an overlay) through `.overrideAttrs` (what #194475 is doing). Instead, we pass the base build helper and an overlay-like implementation to `lib.extendMkDerivation`, and it will return the build helper we want.

The following is the conventional definition of build helper `mkLocalDerivation` that doesn't support fixed-point arguments:

:::{.example #ex-build-helpers-mkLocalDerivation-plain}

# Example definition of `mkLocalDerivation` without fixed-point arguments support

Write the followings in `pkgs/path/to/local-derivation/default.nix`:

```nix
{ lib
, stdenv
}:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, impassablePredicate ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

stdenv.mkDerivation (removeAttrs args [
  "impassablePredicate"
] // {
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
})
```

and call the definition in [`all-packages.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix):

```nix
{
  mkLocalDerivation = callPackage ../path/to/local-derivation { };
}
```

:::

> A wrapper of `lib.extendMkDerivation` around the original definition brings the magical `finalAttrs` to the builder:

Author: > Kind of a nit-pick, but I don't think the documentation should encourage treating fix-points as “magical.” 

Thank you for pointing out! I do hope that such support could be a common practice for all `mkDerivatdon`-like build helpers.

> ```suggestion
> Wrapping the original definition with `lib.extendMkDerivation` requires making the inner function also accept the attrset's fixed-point, called `finalAttrs` here:
> ```

However, it doesn't impose such requirement for the resulting build helper (the whole definition evaluates to a build helper after being called by `callPackage`) to accept a fixed-point function instead of a plain attribute set. Plain attribute set as input argument is also supported, it only adds the the fixed-point argument as an option.

For the definition being wrapped, `finalAttrs` will always be available, but it doesn't mean one need to make additional changes to adopt it.

How about this?

```suggestion
Wrapping the original definition with `lib.extendMkDerivation` to make the result build helper also accept the attrset's fixed-point, called `finalAttrs` here:
```

:::{.example #ex-build-helpers-mkLocalDerivation-extendMkDerivation}

# Example definition of `mkLocalDerivation` extended from `stdenv.mkDerivation` with `lib.extendMkDerivation`

Write in `pkgs/by-name/mk/mkLocalDerivation/package.nix`:

```nix
# Dependencies to be injected by callPackage.
{ lib
, stdenv
}:

# The resulting build helper
lib.extendMkDerivation stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:

{ preferLocalBuild ? true
, allowSubstitute ? false
, impassablePredicate ? (_: false)
, ...
}@args:

removeAttrs args [
  "impassablePredicate"
] // {
  inherit
    preferLocalBuild
    allowSubstitute
    ;
})
```
:::

Should there be a need to modify the result derivation, `lib.customisation.extendMkDerivationModified` additionally takes a derivation modification function as the first argument. See the definition of `buildPythonModule`/`buildPythonApplication` in `pkgs/development/interpreters/python/mk-python-derivation.nix` for practical use cases.

> Extending a build helper with `lib.extendMkDerivation` is different from extending the fixed-point arguments with `lib.extend` or [`<pkg>.overrideAttrs`](#sec-pkg-overrideAttrs), as the implementation can choose *not* to pass some input arguments (e.g. `impassablePredicate`) down the base build helper instead of having to pass everything like a conventional [override](#chap-overrides).

Author: I'm trying to express that:
1. `finalAttrs` is not the fixed point of the "unfixed arguments" (`finalAttrs: { ... }`) taken by the resulting build helper, but the plain arguments to pass to the underlying `mkDerivation`.
2. Unlike an overlay, the "implementation" (`impl`) could choose *not* to pass certain attributes.

The following image contains some data diagrams. The two diagrams in the bottom half of the image represent the data flow for "package overlays passing to nested `<pkg>.overrideAttrs`" and "implementations passing to nested `lib.extendMkDerivation`. Sorry for the ugly handwriting.

![IMG_20240113_153839_858.jpg](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/assets/44064051/81b05313-e00d-4fe4-8fbc-808c23c94244)
